in this video we are going to go over a
way that we can quickly distinguish a
polar molecule from a non-polar molecule
now it's easier if you know what to look
for when a molecule is nonpolar and
before you find out what to look for
when it's
polar the first category of non-polar
molecules are those that are made up of
one element for example if you have a
monoatomic atom or a datomic atom that's
completely posed of one element it's
nonpolar examples include for example uh
N2 that's a diatomic molecule um
O2
cl2 um F2 H2 these are all
non-polar and some of the monoatomic
gases like helium neon argon Xenon the
noble gases um those are also non-polar
the next category to look for is
um a molecule that contains only carbon
and hydrogen those molecules are
non-polar so for example methane um your
alkanes
uh ethane
c2h6 eth ch2 double bond ch2 these are
composed only of carbon and hydrogen and
therefore they are
non-polar the carbon hydrogen bond is
nonpolar
the third area to look for is if the
molecule has symmetry so for example um
carbon
tetrafluoride notice that all of the
outer elements are the same uh this
molecule has symmetry this is
non-polar um sulfur hexor not yeah
sulfur
hexabromide all of the outer elements
are identical this molecule is also uh
nonpolar carbon
dioxide another nonpolar molecule the
two outer elements the oxygen are the
same uh phosphorus Tri
chloride that's another non-polar
molecule each of these molecules they
have symmetry as you can see
bh3 Boron
trihydride also uh
nonpolar now
let's let's say if the molecule lacks
symmetry is it always going to be polar
well it all depends on the
difference if the electro negativity
difference if it's less than
0.5 then um it's going to be non-polar
if it's more polar let me give you an
example of that
so iodine monob bromide iodine has an
electro negativity value of 2.5 and for
Bromine it's about 2.8 because the
difference is like3 this bond is
relatively
non-polar another example if there's no
symmetry is bromine
monochloride chlorine has an electro
negativity value of 3.0 and here once
again thean difference is less than 0.5
so that molecule is
non-polar so those are some quick ways
that you can use to identify if
molecules nonpolar if it doesn't meet
those characteristics generally it's
going to be
polar so what are some quick ways to
identify polar molecules the first thing
is if you see um if a molecule has
hydrogen bonding it's going to be polar
so if hydrogen is directly attached to
nitrogen oxygen or Florine it's polar
examples include
water um
NH3
HF ch3 o even though the carbon hydrogen
bond is nonpolar the presence of the
alcohol means that you have hydrogen
bonding and therefore it's going to be
polar uh ch3
nh2 um because of the
nh2 um it's polar ch3 Co once again
because of the O It's
polar now also if the molecule lacks
Symmetry and if the bond is polar then
it's going to be a polar molecule here's
another example
here the
oxygens here these oxygen are identical
and it has symmetry which makes it
non-polar here this molecule um it does
not have symmetry like uh this one
did carbon has an electr negativity
value of
2.5 oxygen is
3.5 so this bond is
polar here for sulfur it's also 2.5 so
that carbon sulfur bond is non-polar but
because of the carbon oxygen Bond it's
polar in the case on the right when we
have carbon dioxide even though the
carbon oxygen bond is polar because of
two of them because of the Symmetry
those dipole moments cancel out and
therefore um CO2 is non-polar but if you
replace one of the oxygen with a sulfur
molecule then it becomes uh
polar let's look at another
example ch3
F notice that it's similar to
um to this molecule right
here the carbon Florine bond is very
polar carbon has an electronegativity
value of 2.5 and for Florine it's 4.0
it's well above that 0.5 difference and
um so because of the carbon Florine Bond
it's polar the carbon hyd hydrogen bond
is relatively non-polar so the dipole
moments are very small for that but in
this case over here these diap moments
they cancel and that's why because if
you have symmetry it makes it non-polar
but because this molecule lacks symmetry
it's going to be
polar another example is sulfur dioxide
cuz sometimes the shape of the molecule
can affect the
polarity see carbon dioxide which looks
very similar to sulfur dioxide and the
fact that there's two oxygens and one
atom in the middle um because carbon
dioxide has a linear shape the diap
moments they cancel but because sulfur
dioxide has a vent shape the arrows the
diap moment they don't
cancel and you can see um because of the
lone pair this molecule lacks symmetry
so that also makes it
polar the last example is if you look at
NH3 even though it has has hydrogen
bonding which makes it polar um the
geometry also makes it polar as
well if you draw the arrows they all
Point towards the partially negative
Florine atom and they point in One
Direction they don't cancel and that's
another reason why this molecule is
polar so just to review molecules that
are non-polar tend to be um
diatomic um molecules that are composed
of one element or monoatomic atoms like
noble gases they could be pure
hydrocarbons or they could be molecules
that have symmetry where all of the
outer elements are the
same if you see that 99% of the time
it's going to be
non-polar if you don't see it for the
most part it's probably going to be
polar but just to be on a safe side um
look at the electro negativity values if
it's greater than 0.5 um draw the arrow
from the partially positive atom to The
partially negative atom and if the
arrows don't cancel then your molecule
is going to be
polar so hopefully this uh video will
help you to quickly distinguish polar
non-polar molecules and uh I wish you
well in your general chemistry course